# Chapter 4: *An Anonymous Sermon* (also called *Second Clement*)

## Introduction

This anonymous writing is apparently a message that an early Christian wrote down to read to a gathered group of Christians. It was first rediscovered at the end of one of the earliest complete New Testament manuscripts still known to exist. This New Testament manuscript is called *Codex Alexandrinus* and is estimated to have been written in the 5th century. In *Codex Alexandrinus*, this anonymous sermon immediately follows the *The Letter of the Assembly of Rome to the Assembly of Corinth* (also called *First Clement*), which immediately follows *John's Revelation* at the end of the New Testament. These two writings also occur together among the New Testament letters in a Syriac New Testament manuscript from the 12th century and they also occur together an 11th century Greek manuscript called *Codex Hierosolymitanus*. Because of this common association of these two writings, this anonymous sermon has come to be known as *Second Clement*, although there is nothing in the text of either of these writings that associates the one with the other. In Eusebius's *Ecclesiastical History*, he mentions a second letter of Clement, although whether this one we have is the same as the one he refers to is unknown.

There is general agreement among experts on this topic that this anonymous sermon is from the 2nd, or possible late 1st, century. It is generally believed to be the oldest surviving sermon outside of the New Testament. Who might have written it and where it was written are unknown. However, in spite of how little is known about this writing, the fact that is was so respected as to be bound together at times with the New Testament books suggests it must have had some considerable influence in early Christianity and therefore can be helpful in understanding early Christianity.

One of the biggest themes of this sermon, which is clearly written to Christians, is the conditional nature of the Christian's final salvation. The author of this sermon is warning his fellow Christians, and acknowledging his own need for warning too, that although they have already been saved, their final salvation is dependent on their continuing in obedience and right actions and repenting of any wrong that they have not repented of yet. This dual aspect of salvation, with the past aspect often being described in terms of a gift and the future aspect often being described in terms of conditions which must be met in order to be obtained, is typical of how the early Christian writers, including some of the New Testament writers wrote about salvation. The writers of the surviving early Christian writings do not present a concept of salvation compatible with what is called "unconditional eternal security": the idea that the Christian's final salvation is guaranteed, regardless of future actions. 

## Translation

**1**.1. Brothers, we ought to think of Jesus Christ as we do of God—as the “judge of the living and the dead.”^[Acts 10:42, 2 Timothy 4:1 & 1 Peter 4:5. This theme of Jesus as the coming judge seems central to the preaching of both Peter and Paul. This can be seen in Acts 10:42 & Act 17:30-31.] And we ought not to belittle our salvation. 2. For when we belittle him, we hope to get but little; and they that listen as to a trivial matter, do wrong. And we too do wrong when we fail to realize from where and by whom and into what circumstances we were called, and how much suffering Jesus Christ endured for us. 3. How, then, shall we repay him, or what return is worthy of his gift to us? How many holy works we owe to him! 4. For he has given us light; as a Father he has called us sons; he has rescued us when we were perishing. 5. How, then, shall we praise him, or how repay him for what we have received? 6. Our minds were impaired; we worshiped stone and wood and gold and silver and brass, the works of men; and our whole life was nothing else but death. So when we were wrapped in darkness and our eyes were full of such mist, by his will we recovered our sight and put off the cloud which infolded us. 7. For he took pity on us and in his tenderness saved us, since he saw our great error and ruin, and that we had no hope of salvation unless it came from him. 8. For he called us when we were nothing, and willed our existence from nothing.

**2**.1. “Rejoice, you who are barren and childless; cry out and shout, you who were never in labor; for the deserted woman has many more children than the one with the husband.”^[Isaiah 54:1 & Galatians 4:27.] When he says, “Rejoice, you who are barren and childless,” he refers to us; for our assembly was barren before it was given children. 2. And when he says, “Shout, you who were never in labor,” this is what he means: we should offer our prayers to God with sincerity, and not lose heart like women in labor. 3. And he says, “The deserted woman has many more children than the one with the husband,” because our people seemed to be abandoned by God. But now that we believe, we have become more numerous than those who seemed to have God. 4. And another writing^[The Greek word translated here to "writing" is sometimes translated to "scripture" but the Greek word is not specific to a certain type of writing.] says, “I did not come to call the righteous, but sinners.”^[Matthew 9:13, Mark 2:17 & Luke 5:32. If the writer of this work means "writing" in the sense of "scripture", then this is likely the earliest surviving example of a New Testament passage being refered to as scripture.] 5. This means that those perishing must be saved. 6. Yes, a great and wonderful thing it is to support, not things which are standing, but those which are collapsing. 7. Thus it was that the Christ willed to save what was perishing; and he saved many when he came and called us who were actually perishing.

**3**.1. Seeing, then, that he has had such pity on us, firstly, in that we who are alive do not sacrifice to dead gods or worship them, but through him have come to know the Father of truth—what is knowledge in reference to him, save refusing to deny him through whom we came to know the Father? 2. He himself says, “He who acknowledges me before men, I will acknowledge before my Father.”^[Matthew 10:32 & Luke 12:8.] 3. This, then, is our reward, if we acknowledge him through whom we are saved. 4. But how do we acknowledge him? By doing what he says and not disobeying his commands; by honoring him not only with our lips, but with all our heart and mind. And he says in Isaiah as well, “This people honors me with their lips but their heart is far from me.”^[Isaiah 27:13. See Matthew 15:8 & Mark 7:6.]

**4**.1. Let us not merely call him Lord, for that will not save us. 2. For he says, “Not everyone who says to me, Lord, Lord, will be saved, but he who does what is right.”[^4_2] 3. Thus, brothers, let us acknowledge him by our actions, by loving one another, by refraining from adultery, backbiting, and jealousy, and by being self-controlled, compassionate, kind. We ought to have sympathy for one another and not to love money. Let us acknowledge him by acting in this way and not by doing the opposite. 4. We ought not to have fear of men but of God.^[See Matthew 10:28 & Luke 12:5. Notice that this early Christian writer, like Jesus, is applying this teaching on fearing God to Christians and not just to unbelievers. The reason we should fear God is spelled out in the next sentence in the sermon: that is, if we associate with Jesus but do not obey him, he will cast us out.] 5. That is why, if you act in this way, the Lord said, “If you are gathered with me close to my chest and do not keep my commands, I will cast you out and will say to you: ‘Depart from me. I do not know whence you come, you workers of lawlessness.’”^[The source of the full quote is unknown but the inner quote is from Luke 13:27 and is similar to Matthew 7:23.]

[^4_2]: This is either a loose quote of Matthew 7:21, or a quote from some unknown source, which could possibly be oral tradition of Jesus's words.

	Not infrequently, people who are trying to minimize the role of our actions in entering into God's kingdom explain Matthew 7:21 by saying that "doing the will of the Father" includes nothing more than just "believing in Jesus", which they understand to not include obeying Jesus. Notice how this early Christian understands Jesus's words in the sense of doing what is right, not just giving mental assent to truth. This fits with the idea in the previous chapter where the writer contrasts obedience with mearly honoring God with our words.

**5**.1. Therefore, brothers, leaving behind our temporary residence in this world, let us do the will of Him who called us, and let us not be afraid to leave this world. 2. For the Lord said, “You will be like lambs among wolves.” 3. But Peter replied by saying, “What if the wolves tear the lambs to pieces?” 4. Jesus said to Peter: “After their death the lambs should not fear the wolves, nor should you fear those who kill you and can do nothing more to you. But fear him who, when you are dead, has power over soul and body to cast them into the flames of hell.”^[The source of this full dialogue is unknown but could possibly include oral tradition of Jesus's words. Matthew 10:16 & Luke 10:3 record the first part of this dialogue and Matthew 10:28 & Luke 12:5 record the last part.] 5. You must realize, brothers, that our stay in this world of the flesh is small and short, but Christ’s promise is great and wonderful, and means rest in the coming Kingdom and in eternal life. 6. What, then, must we do to get these things, except to lead a holy and upright life and to regard these things of the world as alien to us and not to desire them? 7. For in wanting to obtain these things we fall from the right way.^[See Mark 4:19.]

**6**.1. The Lord says, “No servant can serve two masters.”^[Matthew 6:24 & Luke 16:13.] If we want to serve both God and money, it will do us no good. 2. “For what good does it do a man to gain the whole world and forfeit his life?”^[Matthew 16:26, Mark 8:36 & Luke 9:25.] 3. This world and the world to come are two enemies. 4. This one means adultery, corruption, greed, and deceit, while the other gives them up. 5. We cannot, then, be friends of both. To get the one, we must give the other up.^[See 1 John 2:15-17.] 6. We think that it is better to hate what is here, for it is insignificant, transitory, and perishable, and to value what is there—things good and imperishable.^[See John 12:25.] 7. Yes, if we do the will of Christ, we shall find rest, but if not, nothing will save us from eternal punishment, if we fail to heed his commands. 8. Furthermore, the writing^[See footnote for 2.4.] also says in Ezekiel, “Though Noah and Job and Daniel should rise, they shall not save their children in captivity.”^[See Ezekiel 14:14-20.] 9. If even such upright men as these cannot save their children by their uprightness, what assurance have we that we shall enter God’s Kingdom if we fail to keep our baptism pure and undefiled? Or who will plead for us if we are not found to have holy and upright deeds?^[Contrary to what many people believe today, this early Christian writer obviously did not believe that Jesus would intercede on behalf of people who's actions where not upright.]

**7**.1. So, my brothers, let us enter the contest, recognizing that it is at hand and that, while many come by sea to perishable contests, not all win laurels, but only those who have struggled hard and competed well. 2. Let us, then, compete so that we may all be crowned. 3. Let us run the straight race, the imperishable contest; and let many of us sail to it and enter it, so that we too may be crowned. And if we cannot all be crowned, let us at least come close to it. 4. We must realize that if a contestant in a perishable contest is caught cheating, he is flogged, removed, and driven from the course. 5. What do you think? What shall be done with the man who cheats in the contest for the imperishable? 6. For in reference to those who have not guarded the seal, it says, “Their worm shall not die and their fire shall not be quenched, and they shall be a spectacle to all flesh.”^[Isaiah 66:24. See Mark 9:48.]

**8**.1. So while we are on earth, let us repent. For we are like clay in a workman’s hands. 2. If a potter makes a vessel and it gets out of shape or breaks in his hands, he molds it over again; but if he has once thrown it into the flames of the furnace, he can do nothing more with it. Similarly, while we are in this world, let us too repent with our whole heart of the evil we have done in the flesh, so that we may be saved by the Lord while we have a chance to repent. 3. For once we have departed this world we can no longer confess there or repent any more. 4. Thus, brothers, by doing the Father’s will and by keeping the flesh pure and by abiding by the Lord’s commands, we shall obtain eternal life. 5. For the Lord says in the good message: “If you fail to guard what is small, who will give you what is great? For I tell you that he who is faithful in a very little, is faithful also in much.”^[The source of this exact quote is unknown. It could be a loose quote of Luke 16:10-12.] 6. This, then, is what he means: keep the flesh pure and the seal undefiled, so that we may obtain eternal life.

**9**.1. Moreover, let none of you say that this flesh will not be judged or rise again. 2. Consider this: In what state were you saved? In what state did you regain your sight, if it was not while you were in this flesh? 3. Therefore we should guard the flesh as God’s temple. 4. For just as you were called in the flesh, you will come in the flesh. 5. If Christ the Lord who saved us was made flesh though he was at first spirit, and called us in this way, in the same way we too in this very flesh will receive our reward. 6. Let us, then, love one another, so that we may all come to God’s Kingdom. 7. While we have an opportunity to be healed, let us give ourselves over to God, the physician, and pay him in return. 8. How? By repenting with a sincere heart. 9. For he foreknows everything, and realizes what is in our hearts. 10. Let us then praise him, not with the mouth only, but from the heart, so that he may accept us as sons.^[While it is common today to hear people talking about "accepting Jesus", we see here and in 16.1 that this early Christian writer understands that it is God who must accept us, and that he does so conditionally, based on our actions.] 11. For the Lord said, “My brothers are those who do the will of my Father.”^[See Matthew 12:50, Mark 3:35 & Luke 8:21.]

**10**.1. So, my brothers, let us do the will of the Father who called us, so that we may have life; and let our preference be the pursuit of virtue. Let us give up vice as the forerunner of our sins, and let us flee impiety, lest evils overtake us. 2. For if we are eager to do good, peace will pursue us. 3. This is the reason men cannot find peace^[The word peace is not in the original manuscripts and is supplied here as a guess at the original meaning.]. They give way to human fears, and prefer the pleasures of the present to the promises of the future. 4. For they do not realize what great torment the pleasures of the present bring, and what delight attaches to the promises of the future. 5. If they did these things by themselves, it might be tolerable. But they persist in teaching evil to innocent souls, and do not realize that they and their followers will have their sentence doubled.

**11**.1. Let us therefore serve God with a pure heart and we shall be upright. But if, by not believing in God’s promises; we do not serve him, we shall be wretched.^[As is typical of the early Christian writers, this writer does not understand believing as something that can exist appart from action.] 2. For the word of the prophet says, “Wretched are the double-minded, those who doubt in their soul and say, `We have heard these things long ago, even in our fathers’ times, and day after day we have waited and have seen none of them.’ 3. You fools! Compare yourselves to a tree. Take a vine: first it sheds its leaves, then comes a bud, and after this a sour grape, then a ripe bunch. 4. So my people too has had turmoils and troubles; but after that it will receive good things.”^[Source unknown. This same passage is quoted in *1 Clement* 23.3.] 5. So, my brothers, we must not be double-minded. Rather must we patiently hold out in hope so that we may also gain our reward. 6. For he can be trusted who promised to pay each one the wages due for his work. 7. If, then, we have done what is right in God’s eyes, we shall enter his Kingdom and receive the promises “which ear has not heard or eye seen, or which man’s heart has not entertained.”^[1 Corinthians 2:9.]

**12**.1. Loving and doing what is right, we must be on the watch for God’s Kingdom hour by hour, since we do not know the day when God will appear. 2. For when someone asked the Lord when his Kingdom was going to come, he said, “When the two shall be one, and the outside like the inside, and the male with the female, neither male nor female.”^[Clement of Alexandria quotes something very similar to this in Miscellanies 3.13.92 and says it is from the "Good message according to the Egyptians." The same quote is also found in the *Gospel of Thomas* 22.] 3. Now “the two” are “one” when we tell each other the truth and two bodies harbor a single mind with no deception. 4. “The outside like the inside” means this: “the inside” means the soul and “the outside” means the body. Just as your body is visible, so make your soul evident by your good deeds. 5. Furthermore “the male with the female, neither male nor female,” means this: that when a brother sees a sister he should not think of her gender, any more than she should think of his. 6. When you do these things, he says, my Father’s Kingdom will come.

**13**.1. Right now, my brothers, we must repent, and be alert for the good, for we are full of much stupidity and wickedness. We must wipe off from us our former sins and by heartfelt repentance be saved. And we must not seek to please men or desire to please only ourselves, but by doing what is right to please even outsiders, so that the name may not be scoffed at on our account. 2. For the Lord says, “My name is continually scoffed at by all peoples”^[Isaiah 52:5.];and again, “Alas for him through whom my name is scoffed at!”^[Source unknown.] How is it scoffed at? By your failing to do what I want. 3. For when the heathen hear God’s oracles on our lips they marvel at their beauty and greatness. But afterwards, when they mark that our deeds are unworthy of the words we utter, they turn from this to scoffing, and say that it is a myth and a delusion. 4. When, for instance, they hear from us that God says, “It is no credit to you if you love those who love you, but it is to your credit if you love your enemies and those who hate you,”^[Luke 6:32&35.] when they hear these things, they are amazed at such surpassing goodness. But when they see that we fail to love not only those who hate us, but even those who love us, then they mock at us and scoff at the name.

**14**.1. So, my brothers, by doing the will of God our Father we shall belong to the first assembly, the spiritual one, which was created before the sun and the moon. But if we fail to do the Lord’s will, that writing^[See footnote for 2.4.] will apply to us which says, “My house has become a robber’s den.”^[Jeremiah 7:11, Matthew 21:13, Mark 11:17 & Luke 19:46.] So, then, we must choose to belong to the assembly of life in order to be saved. 2. I do not suppose that you are ignorant that the living assembly is the body of Christ. For the writing^[See footnote for 2.4.] says, “God made man male and female.”^[Genesis 1:27.] The male is Christ; the female is the assembly. The books, moreover, and the apostles say that the assembly is not limited to the present, but existed from the beginning. For it was spiritual, as was our Jesus, and was made manifest in the last days to save us. 3. Indeed, the assembly which is spiritual was made manifest in the flesh of Christ, and so indicates to us that if any of us guard it in the flesh and do not corrupt it, he will get it in return by the Holy Spirit. For this flesh is the copy of the spirit. Consequently, no one who has corrupted the copy will share in the reality. This, then, is what it means, brothers: Guard the flesh so that you may share in the spirit. 4. Now, if we say that the assembly is the flesh and the Christ is the spirit, then he who does violence to the flesh, does violence to the assembly. Such a person, then, will not share in the spirit, which is Christ. 5. This flesh is able to share in so great a life and immortality, because the Holy Spirit clings to it. Nor can one express or tell “what things the Lord has prepared”^[1 Corinthians 2:9.] for his chosen ones.

**15**.1. The advice I have given about self-control is not, I think, unimportant; and if a man acts on it, he will not regret it, but will save himself as well as me who advised him.^[See 1 Timothy 4:16.] For no small reward attaches to converting an errant and perishing soul, so that it may be saved. 2. For this is how we can pay back God who created us, if the one who speaks and the one who hears do so with faith and love. 3. Consequently, we must remain true to our faith and be upright and holy, so that we may petition God in confidence, who says, “Even while you are speaking, I will say, ‘See, here I am.’”^[Isaiah 58:9 (Septuagint).] 4. Surely this saying is a sign of a great promise; for the Lord says of himself that he is more ready to give than we to ask. 5. Let us, then, take our share of such great kindness and not begrudge each other the obtaining of such great blessings. For these sayings hold as much pleasure in store for those who act on them, as they do condemnation for those who disregard them.

**16**.1. So, brothers, since we have been given no small opportunity to repent, let us take the occasion to turn to God who has called us, while we still have One to accept us.^[See the footnote for 9.10.] 2. For if we renounce these pleasures and master our souls by avoiding their evil desires, we shall share in Jesus’s mercy. 3. Understand that “the day” of judgment is already “on its way like a furnace ablaze,”^[Malachi 4:1.] and “the powers of heaven will dissolve”^[2 Peter 3:10.] and the whole earth will be like lead melting in fire. Then men’s secret and public actions will be made clear. 4. Charity, then, like repentance from sin, is a good thing. But fasting is better than prayer, and charity than both. “Love covers a multitude of sins,”^[1 Peter 4:8 & Proverbs 10:12.] and prayer, arising from a good conscience, rescues from death. Blessed is everyone who abounds in these things, for charity lightens sin.

**17**.1 Let us, then, repent with our whole heart, so that none of us will be lost. For if we have been commanded to do this too—to draw men away from idols and instruct them—how much more is it wrong for the soul which already knows God to perish?^[As can be seen from this sentence, the author has not shifted audiences but is still addressing Christians about the possibility that they will not be finally saved.] 2. Consequently we must help one another and bring back those weak in goodness, so that we may all be saved; and convert and admonish one another.

3\. Not only at this moment, while the elders are preaching to us, should we appear believing and attentive. But when we have gone home, we should bear in mind the Lord’s commands and not be diverted by worldly passions. Rather should we strive to come here more often and advance in the Lord’s commands, so that with a common mind we may all be gathered together to gain life. 4. For the Lord said, “I am coming to gather together all peoples, clans, and tongues.”^[Isaiah 66:18.] This refers to the day of his appearing, when he will come to redeem us, each according to his deeds. 5. And “unbelievers will see his glory”^[Isaiah 66:18.] and power, and they will be surprised to see the sovereignty of the world given to Jesus, and they will say, “Alas for us, for you really existed, and we neither recognized it nor believed, and we did not obey the elders who preached to us our salvation.” And “their worm will not die and their fire will not be quenched, and they will be a spectacle to all flesh.”^[Isaiah 66:24. See Mark 9:48.] 6. He refers to that day of judgment when men will see those who were ungodly among us and who perverted the commands of Jesus Christ. 7. But the upright who have done good and patiently endured tortures and hated the pleasures of the soul, when they see those who have deviated and denied Jesus in word and action being punished with dreadful torments and undying fire, will give glory to their God and say, “There is hope for him who has served God with his whole heart.”

**18**.1. Consequently we too must be of the number of those who give thanks and have served God, and not of the ungodly who are sentenced. 2. For myself, I too am a grave sinner, and have not yet escaped temptation. I am still surrounded by the devil’s devices, though I am anxious to pursue righteousness. My aim is to manage at least to approach it, for I am afraid of the judgment to come.

**19**.1. So, my brothers and sisters, after God’s truth^[Literally, "after the God of truth".] I am reading you an exhortation to heed what was there written, so that you may save yourselves and your reader. For compensation I beg you to repent with all your heart, granting yourselves salvation and life. By doing this we will set a goal for all the young who want to be active in the cause of religion and of God’s goodness. 2. We should not, moreover, be so stupid as to be displeased and vexed when anyone admonishes us and converts us from wickedness to righteousness. There are times when we do wrong unconsciously because of the double-mindedness and unbelief in our hearts, and our understanding is darkened by empty desires. 3. Let us, then, do what is right so that we may finally be saved. Blessed are they who observe these injunctions; though they suffer briefly in this world, they will gather the immortal fruit of the resurrection. 4. A religious man must not be downcast if he is miserable in the present. A time of blessedness awaits him. He will live again with the fathers above, and will rejoice in an eternity that knows no sorrow.

**20**.1. But you must not be troubled in mind by the fact that we see the wicked in affluence while God’s slaves are in difficult circumstances. 2. Brothers and sisters, we must have faith. We are engaged in the contest of the living God and are being trained by the present life in order to win laurels in the life to come. 3. None of the upright has obtained his reward quickly, but he waits for it. 4. For were God to give the righteous their reward at once, our training would immediately be in commerce and not in piety, since we would give an appearance of uprightness, when pursuing, not religion[?], but gain. That is why the divine judgment punishes a spirit which is not upright, and loads it with chains.

5\. To the only invisible God, the Father of truth, who dispatched to us the Saviour and prince of immortality, through whom he also disclosed to us the truth and the heavenly life—to him be glory forever and ever. Amen.

## Further Information:

The translation for this chapter is a minor revision of the translation by Cyril C. Richardson, contained in *Early Christian Fathers*, Volume I of *The Library of Christian Classics*, published in 1953 by Westminster Press. The translation by Richardson has been modified to remove difficult, archaic or technical words or to change wording where there was significant disagreement with the majority of other translations consulted.

The following additional translations were consulted in updating Richardson's translation:

* Anonymous (Editorial Secretary of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge), *An English Translation of the So-Called Second Epistle of Clement to the Corinthians*, published in 1922 by The Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge.
* Francis X. Glimm, *The Apostolic Fathers*, Volume 1 of *The Fathers of the Church: A New Translation*, published in 1947 by The Catholic University of America Press
* Edgar J. Goodspeed, *The Apostolic Fathers: An American Translation*, published in 1950 by Harper & Brothers.
* Bart D. Ehrman, *The Apostolic Fathers, Volume I*, Volume 24 of the *Loeb Classical Library*, published in 2003 by Harvard University Press.
* Michael W. Holmes, *The Apostolic Fathers: Greek Texts and English Translations*, 3rd edition, published in 2007 by Baker Academic.
* Christopher Tuckett, *2 Clement: Introduction, Text and Commentary*, published in 2012 by Oxford University Press.
* Rick Brannan, *The Apostolic Fathers: A New Translation*, published in 2017 by Lexham Press.

Some of these translations are available on the Internet and links to them can be found at <http://early.xpian.info/eng/2clement.html>.
